---
title: "From Zero Knowledge to Crypto Hero: 1/O(n)"
date: 2024-07-04
layout: post
---

When approached in a formal way, cryptography, particularly modern one, should be considered as 
a branch of [information theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_theory), more than 
algebra or complexity theory. 
Sure, having well-founded tools that help us make sense of what we build is essential, but in 
principle not necessary. 

Consider the concept of *encryption*, intended as the process of manipulating a 
*plaintext message* $M$, producing a *ciphertext message* $C$, in such a way that deducing 
any property of $M$ from $C$ is impossible[^1], unless a certain *secret key* $K$ is known: 
in general, $M$, $C$ and $K$ could be anything, and the encryption procedure, let's call it $E$, can 
also be quite general: indeed, $E$ could be a randomized process which might not even always produce 
correct results, or even terminate for some combinations of plaintext and secret key! 
It is a bit limiting to already start posing limits, at the most general level possible, on the 
ways such things may work.

### Symbols, Alphabets, Strings
A first "restriction" (which really isn't one) we can make about our messages, keys, and other kinds 
of objects, is that they are *finite concatenations of symbols*, a.k.a. *strings*, where the symbols 
belong to a certain *alphabet* $\mathcal{A}$.
A trivial example would be the Latin (or English) alphabet:

$$\mathcal{A} = \set{\hex{a}, \hex{b}, \hex{c}, \dots, \hex{x}, \hex{y}, \hex{z}}$$

Obviously enough, the word $\hex{dog}$ is a string over the Latin alphabet.
Mathematically, we treat the alphabet as a set, so the number of symbols in the alphabet is simply 
its cardinality $\abs{\mathcal{A}}$ (for the Latin alphabet, $\abs{\mathcal{A}} = 26$. 
We also treat strings as tuples, hence we can equivalently represent the word 
$\hex{house}$ as $\tuple{\hex{h}, \hex{o}, \hex{u}, \hex{s}, \hex{e}}$, and the empty string is 
simply the empty tuple, which is also the empty set $\emptyset$.
A nice set operator that we will encounter often is [Kleene's closure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kleene_star):

$$
\mathcal{A}^* = \bigcup_{n \in \mathbb{N}}{\mathcal{A}^n}
$$

where $\mathcal{A}^n = \underbrace{\mathcal{A} \times \cdots \times \mathcal{A}}_{n \text{ times}}$ 
denotes the n-fold [Cartesian product](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cartesian_product) of 
$\mathcal{A}$, with $\mathcal{A}^0 = \emptyset$.



A brief pedantic degression on the terminology we are going to use, note that this is not necessarily 
standard:
- A *tuple* is a finite concatenation of arbitrary objects.
- A (finite) *string* is a tuple where all of its objects are symbols of an alphabet.
- A *language* is a (potentially infinite) set of strings, usually defined via some property.
- A (finite) *word* is a string that belongs to some agreed *language*.
- A *sequence* is a (potentially infinite) ordered collection of numbers, usually defined via some formula.



### "Wait, everything is not just zeros and ones?" "Never has been..."
Although some famous general results in [computation theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_speedup_theorem),
allow us to basically treat everything as a "sequence of zeros and ones", in the same way our 
good old digital computers do, so that it is customary to have $\mathcal{A} = \set{\hex{0}, \hex{1}}$, 
there are cases in which we need to treat this equivalence with care.

Godspeed,

Stefano

<br>
<br>

[^1]: For the sake of simplicity, we say impossible: in the future, we will start using more appropriate terms of the technical jargon, such as *infeasible* or *negligible*. Similarly, the fact that "any property" of $M$ cannot be deduced from $C$ is also often a bit too strong.
