---
title: "From Zero Knowledge to Crypto Hero: 0/O(n)"
date: 2024-07-04
layout: post
---

This is my first blog post in a long time, at least since high school, when I used to be pretty 
active in several Android and Minecraft forums.
Nevertheless, time passes by, new things are learnt and others are forgotten. 
The best way to avoid forgetting notions and skills is, of course, to do something which requires 
using and deepening them.

### What is this all about?
As an attempting researcher in cryptography[^1], with a passion for high performance algorithms, 
I get to see various bits and pieces of the field, some which I like (or simply deal with) more 
than others. 
This is the introduction to a series of blog posts, hopefully coherently structured, that will act 
as a sort of public diary from which someone else might also benefit.
The title, other than a play of words, sets the expectations for this series: it's going to be 
about cryptography, and will include topics such as 
[Zero Knowledge Proofs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-knowledge_proof); its length is going to 
be $\call{O}{n}$, not $\call{\Theta}{n}$, because I cannot guarantee any a-priori lower bound.

The posts will include a mix of general discussions, theoretical notions, code snippets 
(usually C++), and random banter: they are meant to be read in order, so later posts might include 
notation and concepts that were introduced in earlier posts.


### The Magical yet Real World of Cryptography

I find the field of cryptography fascinating: it spans concepts from subjects which one may know 
well, together with others that you may have heard of in that course you didn't really enjoy, or 
just heard as a buzzword somewhere, up to things you didn't know people actually studied or even 
existed (sorry, I have never seen a documentary about 
[elliptic curve twists](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twists_of_elliptic_curves)).

Furthermore, cryptography is actually used in the real world: in the same way scientific computing 
allows people to actually see (at least simulated) the beautiful fundamental laws of physics in 
action, cryptography allows us to put in action more or less advanced concepts of mathematics and 
computer science.
To me, this is another big plus: a cryptographic scheme is often just as useful as it is efficient, 
and the interplay between security, performance, and energy consumption introduces additional 
facets which allows for a variety of trade-offs and possible choices.

### An Inspiring Example

An elegant example that showcases a few of the many interconnections we alluded to, is the 
[Legendre symbol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legendre_symbol):

$$
\legendre{x}{p} =
\begin{cases}
    0  & x \equiv 0 \pmod{p} \\
    1  & \exists y\colon x \equiv y^2 \pmod{p} \\
    -1 & \nexists y\colon x \equiv y^2 \pmod{p}
\end{cases}
$$

where $x$ is an integer and $p$ is a prime number. 
Now:
- Number theory tells us that $\legendre{x}{p} = x^{\frac{p - 1}{2}} \bmod p$: exactly half of 
the numbers in $\set{1, \dots, p - 1}$ has symbol $1$, and the other half has symbol $-1$, so 
[we might think of using it](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/0-387-34799-2_13) 
as a pseudorandom bit generator, by fixing a random $s$ as seed and outputting 
$\legendre{s + 1}{p}$, $\legendre{s + 2}{p}$, etc.
- Complexity theory related to the [quadratic residuosity problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quadratic_residuosity_problem), 
and [existing cryptanalysis](https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/862), leads us to believe[^2] that the 
sequence $\legendre{s + n}{p}_{n \in \mathbb{N}}$, when $s$ is unknown, is hard to predict.
- Since $\parens{p-1}/2$ is known, we can use [addition chains](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Addition-chain_exponentiation)
and [Montgomery multiplication](https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/1057) to implement the Legendre symbol 
quite efficiently, possibly within a high-performance programming language (e.g. C, C++, Rust).

Isn't that cool? The Legendre-PRF will be one of the basic cryptographic algorithms that we're 
going to write once we will have developed the necessary building blocks.
Mind, it's not going to be the fastest PRBG out there by any means, but it turns out to be pretty 
good when embedded within advanced cryptographic protocols such as [Secure Multi Party Computation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_multi-party_computation), due to its simple algebraic representation.

Godspeed,

Stefano

<br>
<br>

[^1]: Since it is well-established that [cryptology is blockchain astrology](https://youtu.be/xsmMStLKJw4?si=jsP04OYkOw1cm20u&t=2880), I will use the term *cryptography* to refer both to the design and the analysis aspects of the field.

[^2]: Often times complexity theory is just like death or taxes, but in reverse.
